The most common type of Geometry is known
as Euclidean Geometry and it’s named after
Euclid of Alexandria and he was a Greek who
lived a long time ago in Egypt.
Around 300 BC, he wrote a very, very famous book. In
fact, a set of 13 books. It was called The
Elements. And, this is the basis of the Geometry
that you learned when you were at school.
It’s the Geometry of things in a plane and
of things in three-dimensional space. It’s
Geometry about lines and triangles and circles.
It’s based on a few axioms, if you like
fundamental underlying principles. And, from
these few axioms, all the other principles
of Geometry can be derived. Importantly, there
are no numbers in Euclidean Geometry. We have
lines. We have letters. We talk about parallel
lines and we talk about right angles, but
there are no numbers in Euclidean Geometry
and there are no coordinate frames either.
Rene Descartes was a very, very famous thinker
in the 17th Century. He was a philosopher.
He was a mathematician and he was even a part
time mercenary in his younger days. He’s
often referred to as the Father of Modern
Philosophy and he was particularly famous
for the translation from the original Latin
of this quote, “I think, therefore I am.”
There are many stories about Descartes’
life. One that I particularly like is the
fact that he found that was very, very useful
to lay in bed all through the morning and
think. It was his thinking time. And, it’s
a really great principle.
One morning, he was lying in bed, looking
at the wall, and a fly came in, and it landed
on the wall. And, he realized that he would
be able to describe the position of the fly
simply in terms of two numbers. So wherever
the fly was on the wall, it could be described
very succinctly using just two numbers. And,
this is the basis of the Cartesian coordinate
frame where we represent the position of something
in the plane using two coordinates, two numbers.
So, the very important thing that Descartes
did was he added Algebra to Euclidean Geometry.
And, that allowed us then to express shapes
in terms of equations. We can express lines
in terms of equation. We have the equations
for two lines. We can work out how they intersect
and what angle they intersect. It’s the
fusion of Algebra with the ancient Geometry.
We refer to this as Cartesian Geometry or
Analytic Geometry. It’s called Cartesian.
That’s derived from his name in Latin which
was Cartesius. So, he is the one who developed
the coordinate system, a very, very familiar
concept to us today, but it dates back to
only the 17th Century. So, let’s look at
a 2D coordinate frame. We have a pair of axes.
Each of these is a real number line and they
intersect at a point that we refer to as the
origin. So, two axes form a 2D coordinate
frame, an x-axis and a y-axis. Now, let’s
describe a point using this two-dimensional
coordinate frame. In order to do that, we
drop a line down to the x-axis and its distance
from the origin we refer to by the quantity
a. And, we drop another line across to the
y-axis and the distance along the y-axis from
the origin we refer to as the distance b.
So, the point P can be described very succinctly
using a pair of numbers and we write them
in brackets just like that.
A mathematician would say that a point is
a location in an n-dimensional space. We would
say that the point P is an element of, or belongs
to, the set of real numbers to the power of
n. In this case, it would be R squared. We
can represent the point by a Cartesian coordinate.
We can also refer to it as an n-tuple. That’s
a group of n numbers. We number them from
x1, x2, all the way up to xn. Again, in the
simple two-dimensional case, n is simply equal
to 2. We can think of a vector as an arrow
from the origin of our coordinate frame to
the point of interest. And, we denote vectors
by lower case letters. Points by upper case
letters, vectors by lower case letters. In
this case, lower case p.
A vector has got two components. A horizontal
component of length a, and a vertical component
of length b. We write the vector p differently
to the way we write the point P. We write
it as a vector. That’s a stack of numbers,
one above the other. In this case, a above
b. So, it’s a two element vector. It’s
also the same as a 2 by 1 matrix.
That’s a matrix with two rows and one column.
A mathematician would say that a vector is an element of an
n-dimensional vector space and we'd write
that as lower case p is an element of or belongs
to the set of real numbers to the power of
n. Once again, in this simple case, n is equal
to 2 because it’s a two-dimensional coordinate
frame. We can represent our vector, our arrow
on the coordinate frame, as a mathematical
n vector, a vector with two elements. And
so, that’s the elements x1, x2, all the
way up to xn and we apply the transpose operator.
Here, I’ve written the vector as a row vector.
The elements are next to each other horizontally.
When I transpose it, it becomes a column vector,
the elements one above the other, and this
will become important later, when we start
to multiply matrices and vectors together.
We can also consider that a vector is a relative
displacement. It talks about a motion. How
do we get from the origin to the point P?
How do we get there? Well, we follow the path
which is this vector, this arrow. Another
important consideration is that this vector
has a particular starting point. And so, we
refer to this as a bound vector. So, this
vector here shown in red is different to this
vector here. Although they’ve got the same
length and they’ve got the same angle, they
are different vectors. Important to keep in
mind that in this course, all of our vectors
are bound. They have a particular starting
point. They’re defined with respect to a
particular coordinate frame.
Another way we can express this vector, lower
case p, is in terms of unit vectors. So, let’s
define two unit vectors. These are vectors
with a length of 1 and I denote those with
a hat symbol on top. So, we have the unit
vector x hat and the unit vector y hat. Now,
I can express my vector in terms of two components.
One component is the distance a multiplied
by the unit vector x hat, plus another vector,
a vertical vector, which is the distance b
multiplied by the unit vector y hat. So, this
is a component representation of a vector
and we’ll be using this notation later on
in this lecture.
Importantly, points and vectors are different
things. A point defines a location. We can’t
adicionar dois pontos juntos. Não faz sentido.
E, nem podemos multiplicar dois pontos. É
um conceito sem sentido. Vetores não definem uma
localização. Eles especificam como sair de uma
localização para outra. Vetores são objetos que
nós podemos adicionar e subtrair. E, podemos
multiplicar um vetor por um escalar. Eu posso
ter um vetor e multiplica-lo por 2. Agora, eu
tenho uma seta que é duas vezes maior, mas na
mesma direção e com o mesmo começo
do vetor que eu tinha antes. A diferença
entre dois pontos é um vetor. Então, eu posso
pegar a diferença entre dois pontos e
o resultado não é mais um ponto e sim
um vetor. Da mesma forma, eu posso definir um
ponto em termos de um deslocamento de um vetor
do ponto inicial. Então, para o caso bidimensional,
um ponto é representado por dois números reais
e um vetor é também representado pelos dois
números reais. Mas, pontos e vetores são coisas
diferentes.
Precisamos ser cuidadosos quando criamos um sistema
de coordenadas. Essa é a forma padrão. É
referido como sistema de coordenadas destro.
nós giramos do eixo x em 90° até o eixo y.
E, aqui está um outro exemplo
de um sistema de coordenadas destro. Se nós
virássemos o quadro de cabeça para baixo
agora teríamos o eixo x nessa direção e o
eixo y para baixo. Então, nós giraríamos isso
em 90° para baixo a fim de definir o eixo y.
Agora, nós precisamos ser bem consistentes na
forma de definir o sistema de coordenadas e nós
sempre usaremos o sistema destro.
Nós nunca usaremos um sistema de coordenadas
assim, apenas sistemas que se parecem com isso.
Quando nós construímos um sistema de coordenadas
bidimensional de dois eixos, de fato, há duas
formas diferentes de construirmos esse
sistema de coordenadas. Um sistema
canhoto e um destro.
Agora, nesse curso, nós vamos apenas
lidar com o sistema de coordenadas destro.
Então, como construímos um sistema destro?
Bem, nós começamos desenhando o eixo x
primeiro e o eixo y é criado ao girarmos
o eixo x em 90° no sentido anti-horário.
Isso nos dá um sistema de coordenadas
destro. Então, não importa a orientação do
do sistema, a orientação relativa dos eixos
x e y é muito crítica e deve seguir
essa convenção. Outra coisa importante
a se manter na mente é que a geometria euclidiana
se aplica apenas na superfície plana. E, um dos
postulados e axiomas é muito claro sobre
isso, diz que linhas paralelas nunca
se cruzam e esse é, é claro, o caso
em um plano.
No entanto, em algo como uma esfera, por
exemplo, a superfície do nosso planeta, isso
não se aplica mais. As linhas paralelas no
equador irão se cruzar nos polos. As regras
da geometria euclidiana não se aplicam a tal
superfície, mas diríamos que a superfície
da Terra leva a uma geometria não-euclidiana.
No Entanto, numa pequena área, a geometria
euclidiana é uma aproximação muito boa.
Então, na escala de uma sala, talvez até na
escala de uma cidade, a geometria euclidiana
– o fato de linhas paralelas não se cruzarem
- é uma suposição muito boa a ser feita.